### Notes: A Global Market for Gas

One issue that I'm currently trying to untangle over some portion of my commuting time is the basic logic around the formation of a global natural gas market. On one side, the difficulty of gas transportation implies a high friction against the formation of such a market, but recent (1-2 years) LNG pricing has appeared to be comprised almost entirely of resource cost + transport cost, implying a high liquidity (global!) market. So that's it, we're done, right? 

Well, not really. There's an understanding at the moment that we might be in a period of over supply. Up and midstream firms in the US (and here I'm conflating oil and gas due to their commingled presence in many operations and companies) have repeatedly weathered oversupply and financial stressors to continue drilling, fracing, and producing. This is a transition time, and some analysts see supply being consumed by long term contracts and additional demand; investment inherently constrained by falling prices initially beget from the new (liquid or not) global supply. The ultimate fate of existing nukes in developed nations and how quickly developing countries are able to transition away from fossils fuels (and foreign dependence) both play a role, although industrial and residential demand cannot be discounted as long term sinks as well. 

# Politics

Finally, there's the politics of it all. To some extent Russia has managed to keep pieces of the former USSR on a leash (along with pieces of the EU in an at least slightly more subtle process) with its pipelines and extraction expertise. In that context, shale has been the major fracture point in terms of American-Russo relations of the last decade. An ascendant American oil and gas production and export regime may only challenge Russian hegemony at the margins, but when your economy and influence is so concentrated in a particular sector, loss of marginal control is a deeply worrying prospect. Additionally, America 's expertise in the field isn't limited to a national company at the state's beck and call (i.e., Gazprom), but rather a diverse portfolio of profit seeking enterprises which will be more than happy to lend their (expensive) expertise to whomever is willing to pay. 

# The Future

None of this is to count out the old hands of LNG export either, from Australia and Qatar on down to Trinidad and Tobago. Competition between these countries (and the national and international firms paying to develop new terminals and producing new trains at existing ones) could generate a cycle of production and competition that at the very least continues to promote the appearance of a global market at least into the 2020s. At which point, having had what appeared to be a global market for more than 5 years, perhaps it will simply exist despite today's skeptics. Conversely, if demand collapses or transportation and infrastructure developers fail to secure the permits and financing to support further lock-in the global market will stall out and separate into the regional fiefdoms that previously defined global natural gas. 

Either way, if current price signals suggest the global market is real there's no reason to not participate in the moment. Plus, if you believe its collapse is imminent, based on the backlog of tankers and terminals you should have ample opportunity to profit. 
