### Antitrust and Industry Capture, the Think Tanks that don't Think

Reading an article on the proposed AT&T and Time Warner merger ([arsTechnica](https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2018/03/atttime-warner-merger-will-raise-tv-bills-436-million-a-year-us-says/)) piqued my interest on the current status and practice of antitrust enforcement in the United States. This is a topic I've previously discussed and one which is near to my heart in the context of my professional life in energy and compliance markets which involves the assessment of market power in a pricing context as well as concentration and regulatory efficiency. Fortunately, the ars piece mentions a name I could look into further, Carl Shapiro, a professor at Berkeley in Haas, and one of the DOJ's expert witnesses in this case. I was delighted to find that Shapiro is particularly prolific on this topic and has written recently on both antitrust in the current populist environment and horizontal mergers in general ([Haas](https://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/shapiro/)).

Shapiro is a strong advocate for the "consumer welfare standard" as a measuring stick when looking for areas in which antitrust mitigation is warranted. The consumer welfare standard is a simple and durable tool in the US antitrust toolbox (also foundational, it stretches back to the beginnings of the field ~100 years ago) which finds behavior to be anti-competitive when it disrupts competitive processes and harms trading parties on the other side of the transaction. Despite the name, it's important to understand the consumer welfare standard in a broader context than individual humans. Per Shapiro's example, the maligned trading party can be airlines dealing with a jet fuel cartel; there is no requirement for the harm to be traced all the way to those of us hoping for more reasonable tickets to Hoboken. I highly recommend reading at least his 4 page opening statement ([Haas, pdf](https://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/shapiro/consumerwelfarestandard.pdf)) to the senate judiciary committee on this topic.

## The Phoenix Center

While googling around to learn a bit more on this topic I came across a few article decrying the extraordinarily weak case of the DOJ. It's always a minor (but helpful!) shock to come into contact with opinions that are orthogonal to the way I'm thinking, but this sense was heightened by the absolute certainty these articles portrayed. In their language and presentation it was completely absurd that the DOJ was even considering action. More recent iterations stated that the fig leaf Time Warner had presented (in terms of temporary restrictions) so thoroughly obviates the need for antitrust enforcement that it would be crazy to grant this case the time of day moving forward ([Forbes](https://www.forbes.com/sites/larrydownes/2018/02/01/the-governments-unraveling-antitrust-case-against-att-time-warner/#6096a7ab1268)). 

Clicking on a few further links triggered my pattern recognition routine. One or two people, and one source (university? Think tank? Lobbying group?), the Phoenix Center for Advanced Legal and Public Policy Studies, dominated the literature claimed in support of lax enforcement for this merger. Going a little further back, the Phoenix Center's research and publications were not limited to antitrust, but were wholly within the sphere of established telecom companies and their interests. I eventually realized that they were indeed a think tank, and, of course, headquartered here in D.C. They also seemed to have the same two principals for more than 10 years, Lawrence Spiwak and George Ford. 

These fellows will engage in spurious research couched in high minded economics terms to support pre-existing opinions, particularly when it comes to anything that might challenge the incumbent players in the telecom space  ([Motherboard, Vice](https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/z43493/how-the-telecom-lobby-rewrites-americas-laws)). The Phoenix Center refuses to disclose its donors, but it does frequently engage in direct attacks on research that doesn't support the telecom by attacking the funding sources and associations of those other researchers (Google is a target they hit again and again in the last 5 years, Google Fiber acting as the obvious trigger). 

## Regulatory Capture, but for Research

Taken together, their op-eds and publications often read like a purposefully disingenuous memo I was tasked with writing in grad school. We were tasked with advocating for a specific energy resource through whatever we could muster. I chose coal to make it a bit more difficult on myself. Perhaps my favorite spurious data point were figures showing a nearly 1:1 relationship between the decline of coal mining in local communities and the rise of their prison populations. Any rational observer would realize that argument wasn't even close to encompassing the real legacy of coal communities in America and the rise of incarceration in the latter half of the 20th century, but if you came into the discussion with a pre-existing positive outlook on coal, you might be happy to claim the point. On the flip side, it seems so patently absurd as to unbalance the opposing argument. Why even lend credence to such an absurd argument by treating it as one made in good faith? It's simply not that difficult to to disfigure discourse in the manner, and is a tactic widely employed, albeit in subtler ways, and couched in numerous terms of art (unless you're the Heartland Institute, in which case you go straight to things like "Renewable energy deployment in 2008-2012 destroyed these communities", completely ignoring the recession).

So, be careful what you read, and try to check sources. As the proliferation of industry-specific and industry-supportive+supported think tanks has gone hand in hand it's trickier than it used to be, particularly where these organizations sprung from the ashes of internal policy groups or were formed wholesale from long-term industry insiders. Fortunately, we have the Internet, and plenty of these fellows (it's typically men) will have their entire work history browsable on their LinkedIn. This is a positive side effect of their influence peddling day job, and allows a bit more insight into their past which might not appear in the curated previous work and publications sections on their own websites.

Finally, I think the term "think tank" doesn't really apply in these specific cases of industry capture. We have the term regulatory capture for public commissions or agencies who have been coopted by the interests they are meant to regulate, and it seems appropriate to use a similar phrase here. But that's just describing what has occurred, these organizations don't deserve the moniker "think tank" at all. Unfortunately, I didn't manage to come up with anything clever or interesting on this commute, so I'll have to keep thinking about it. So far all I've got is "Thought Bowl" (also "Stink Tank", but, come on, I'm only in on that one because of how easy it was).
